is the future of Buddhism completely
hopeless is it more or less hopeless
than it seems
I'd always get complaints when I'd open
my videos talking about myself my
academic background my research
background and so on they say why you
talk so much about yourself in your
videos but for me it's really weird to
open a video like this without telling
people a little bit about myself and how
many years I was involved in Buddhism
that I was a scholar of bosom that I
lived in Buddhist monasteries that I
studied the ancient scriptural language
called pali pali one which is really the
only language we have two teaching of
the buddha extant in not sanskrit oh if
I don't say something with the years and
years that put into Buddhism in Sri
Lanka Cambodia Laos Thailand and I'll
say something then I'm just some bold
guy on the Internet although boldness
boldness really does qualify you to have
an opinion but is that based on
appearances right now yeah gee I didn't
realize that putting on this jacket I
might look like I know something about
what look um I have one supporter and
longtime follower on YouTube and patreon
and he really lost faith in Buddhism
because of the critique
offered on my channel he should start
his own YouTube channel and tell his own
story in his own terms and look dude I'm
not even saying you should come on
camera with your own face you can do
animation you can draw stick figures you
know you can use hand puppets there are
lots of ways to tell your story on
YouTube without ruining your life the
way I have both putting your putting
your purse like that Diddy on camera but
anyway it is a dramatic story that the
videos on my channel really led him to
start asking serious questions about
supernatural elements of Buddhism and
ethical elements too and a lot of what
said about meditation what's ironic is
that when he talks to me now I seem like
I'm way more optimistic about the future
of Buddhism than he is he seems like his
perspective he seems like from his
perspective Buddhism is just as hopeless
as Islam just as hopeless as
Christianity or Judaism or more so and
we all know in some sense Buddhism is
different and
this video is going to question how or
how much what are the prospects for the
future of what isn't this way
and maybe my answer is a little bit
different that it would have been a
couple of years ago in the recent past
we are right now packing up to leave for
Taiwan
we literally have suitcases on the floor
just off-camera I do not think I will
get involved with any Buddhist temple or
any Buddhist organized religion when I'm
there I do not think I will get involved
with any Taoist temple or any organized
religion there but I could it's it's
it's not unthinkable I have some
interests in common with those people
there's some common ground
something like ecological activism vegan
activism animal rights activism even
pro-democracy activism and
anti-communist
activism I could have those things in
common with people who are part of
organized Buddhist groups today or in
theory even Confucian groups
Confucianism is not as big as that
wisdom in Taiwan there is some common
ground to be built on there okay when I
first first first got involved with
Buddhism Theravada Buddhism I met a man
who was a sin Alize immigrant to Toronto
so still in Canada before I left for my
many years living in Asia and I remember
what he said was that he felt totally
disgusted with the authoritarian
attitudes of the Buddhist monks this is
a really interesting point that seems
shallow but if you've been involved for
dozen for four years this actually cuts
really deep now he spoke English as a
second language so I'm really
paraphrasing and restructuring the point
he made but it was a good point even if
he couldn't couldn't state it clearly in
English what he had to say was that when
you actually read the original
philosophical scriptures in the Pali
Canon there in an open-ended skeptical
dialogue format people cross examine
each other they doubt each other they
debate things and then they come to
conclusions and you know he sees this as
the essential defining feature of
as a religion and Buddhist philosophy
okay so the story of Noah's Ark is not
in that format the story story of Noah's
Ark does not invite doubt and
cross-examination and disagreement and
debate it's someone it tells you this is
the truth it doesn't really say it's the
right thing the gates either you believe
it or you don't and you go to hell
story of Noah's Ark the story of Moses
you know fighting against the Egypt's
it's probably fighting from Egypt
fighting against the Egyptians the story
of Jesus on the cross if this were true
though if really the defining essential
element of Buddhism as philosophy were
open-ended skeptical dialogues of this
kind then obviously the religion would
have continued to progress over time and
it didn't it ossified right at the start
during the lifetime of the Buddha it
came to one set of fixed conclusions and
that was it
game over now why is that this is what
almost nobody will be will be honestly
about the reason is very simply that the
authors of the ancient scriptures they
did not have the concept of
hallucination as something different
from real experience so that whole
corpus of scriptures is based on the
concept people engage in highly rational
skeptical philosophical dialogues and
then sooner or later they come to an
understanding or some of them end
acrimoniously but that the fundamental
truth of Buddhism would be self-evident
to people as soon as they had the
solution genic experiences that they
would hallucinate they would see the
same things the buddha saw they would
see the same things that other but as
monks saw and then they would know the
truth now whether you think of this as a
kind of guided meditation or kind of
hypnosis experience or I mean it's just
the fact that most people in their
dreams and their hallucinations they see
the things they expect to see we believe
it or not remembering one specific
dialogue with the put up what he's being
asked by a skeptical follower why is it
that I had the
SaLuSa nation and I could see the gods
but I couldn't hear what they were
saying this kind of thing it's very very
clear these people absolutely believed
in hallucination so parallel history if
really this was about skeptical dialogue
and open inquiry and if still today
that was what Buddhist monk said they
stood for say look we're part of a
tradition that began with the Buddha
asking tough questions the Buddha
rejecting blind faith in Hinduism blind
faith in the Vedas blind faith and the
authority of what everyone's
grandparents I believed it and said no
we're starting from scratch we're asking
all the fundamental questions we're
asking what is the meaning of life how
was the world created what's the
creation of the universe we're gonna
start right we're gonna start a whole
new religion here we're gonna reject all
the preconceived notions of our
ancestors and we're gonna come to new
conclusions through philosophical
dialogue enquiry that's a great story
and it's it's partly true I mean it is
partly true that's why it's such a
compelling narrative but if that had
been what Buddhism was about at the time
of its founding and it continued to be
what it's about today nobody in Buddhism
would believe that the earth is flat
nobody would believe that there are
demons nobody would believe that they
could communicate with gods and angels
nobody would believe that hell at heaven
are real places you can go after you die
so on and so forth
and these two narratives the narrative
of Buddhism as philosophical dialogue
and the narrative of Buddhism as faith
they compete in one in the same place of
one of the same time there was a very
moving autobiographical account I read
about six years ago of a Buddhist nun in
Malaysia and so she wrote this herself
was from her own perspective and she was
trying to help a man and it's it's
written in very careful compassionate
terms she was trying to help a man whom
she obviously regarded as insane and
this man was seeing demons and seeing
ghosts of dead people I don't remember
if he saw angels or gods will give you
so more benevolent apparitions also and
some other Buddhist monk might have
encountered this man and said oh like
you're naturally gifted with
clairvoyance oh wow you're seeing
exactly the stuff that's in the
scriptures oh great
some other Buddhist monk might have
affirmed his idea that these were real
things he was seeing and this Buddhist
nun she was taking the approach of
trying to explain to the man that he was
having extreme mood swings he was having
kind of extreme anger or an extreme
dejection extreme depression and he was
seeing these things because of his own
emotional state and she was kind of
taking baby steps and trying to get
across to him the concept that he was
seeing things that weren't that were not
real of course we don't know the whole
story about why why that guy was
hallucinating as as well as he was but
obviously the particular hallucinations
he had sown they're all culturally
programmed what it is you see and what
is you you think you see but that
scenario has the Buddhist monk debunking
Buddhism for the sake of of Buddhism
right so the question of you know can
what ISM you know have a future I I
don't think it comes down to something
as cynical as cherry-picking the the
ancient sources I think that's that's
the problem and that's not the solution
I think that basically there's a
difference between looking at the
historical sources and accepting them as
a monument to that time in that moment
in history and then regarding in a sense
the book has as closed on that right so
I mean you guys know this with me I do
have some respect for the historical
figure of Socrates but Socrates neither
asks nor answers most of the ethical
questions I'm interested in most of the
political questions of interestin
do you know of any source in which
Socrates is opposed to slavery I don't I
mean it's possible there's a lot of but
I've never seen anything refer to saw
you standing up and saying slavery is
immoral and it's wrong all right
now do you know of any source in which
the Buddha stands company in India and
says he's opposed to slavery well I have
actually looked at all the pastors in
the Canada mention slavery there are
definitely some kind of satirical social
commentary passages that are indeed
heaping scorn on the institution of
slavery but no the the religion doesn't
stand for the abolition of slavery you
could say more there's a kind of I know
shrewd awareness that slavery is a bad
thing that kind of gets guest talked
about and don't put them fasting here
and there but that's that's very
different isn't that so you know in the
same sense that nobody would look to
these ancient texts really with the
answers to modern questions you know the
question becomes it is it possible to
look back at those texts and say okay
today we are going to stand for the same
higher principle that they stood for
just as the Buddha in his own time
rejected the crass ignorance of ancient
Hinduism he rejected sacrificing cows he
rejected starving herself he rejected
drinking the milk from only one nipple
of the cow while fast it's really
bizarre ancient Hindu rituals that we
get described in detail in the Bali
Canon by the way uh-huh
we rejected I mean animal sacrifice was
a huge part of Hinduism at that time you
know that the elite level of the Hindu
religion the kings were part of and he
rejected most shockingly the authority
of the Vedas and he rejected the beliefs
of his own parents and grandparents and
his whole society and said I'm starting
something new and I'm starting with
these these fundamental questions very
obviously in our time most of the
beliefs most of the tenants he arrived
at through that inquiry an inquiry that
included hallucination and believing in
hallucinations is real it's a bedrock
assumption throughout the polygons most
of the answers he came to are things
that we would reject today so the only
thing that remains for us is to verify
the questioning itself the questioning
the rebellion the idea of standing up as
a man of principle and I think the
Buddha does you know fairly enough you
know embody that and so on the idea of
striking out and taking your own way
rather than respecting established
Authority and tradition in little things
and in great and in a lot of ways what
I've just described is the same kind of
respect we can have for Socrates you
know Socrates is wrong
sorry he's wrong about a lot of things
Socrates is guilty of the crimes he was
charged with
sorry it's topic for another video
there's not a lot I would agree with
Socrates on if he came through a time
machine and we're sitting here talking
today right but there's a question of
method
there's the defiance the principle the
questioning the coming new conclusions
there's that that he represents so you
know yes there is potential for Buddhism
to become a good and an even great
religion not in the distant future but
right here now it can happen like a
tease play most of the Buddhist
intellectuals I ever knew believed
exactly the same thing as I did they
were just at very varying degrees of
denial about it
I feel you can't study these texts and
actually believe I mean go to any temple
in Thailand and they have the statues
depicting people being tortured in hell
like you know is this your religion do
you go around preaching to people oh you
know if if you do this you're gonna be
reincarnated in hell where you're gonna
be forced to climb a giant tree with
iron spikes that pierce your body and
yes I've seen statues very accurately
depicting what that experience is
supposed to look like you know do you
actually believe that the Buddha spoke
to Indra do you actually believe that
the Buddha walked through the mountains
and spoke to a Yeti named su Chi Loma
let you know all these supernatural
things you could believe you could shoot
lasers out of his hands and thighs and
all that all the crazy miracles enough
is that it's what you believe in is that
what you want your children to believe
in
your grandchildren I believe in do you
want your children performing these
these religious rituals well the
challenge ahead for Buddhism as hard as
that may may sound it's it's a lot
easier than even sitting down with a
circle of Jewish rabbis and saying look
guys
circumcision cutting off part of the
penis it's got a hand and sky and now
that's the conversation that's very very
hard to have it was it's basically
impossible for anyone to sit down in
Islam and say hey look guys jihad
slavery in a huge part of what you know
the Quran and the hadith they're all
about hey how about animal sacrifice
let's throw that in - hey guys you know
it's 21st century garbage most of the
world's major religions really have no
capacity for amendment and because we
use the word amendment in American
politics so often I think we forget just
really what it means but Buddhism is
very radically and fundamentally open to
amendment because it began as the most
radical and fundamental attempt at
amending the religions that existed
before it in ancient India